Hi everybody,
I'm Dave Zarzycki and I'm going to be
talking to you about launchd today.
And although the title may say
managing processes with launchd,
it's really about helping you
get your processes run when you
need them and when you want them.
But first,
and for the first third of this talk,
I want to talk big.
I want to talk about Apple and
I want to talk about the goals we
have for ourselves and how they
permeate the system and go all the
way down to a low level technology
like launchd and how they permeate
back to everyone else at the company
and or third parties to make really
great products for all our customers.
So these are three fundamentally
different products,
but they're all derived from the
same core Unix operating system.
But only one of them, the laptop,
has a terminal.
The other two, no terminal.
In fact,
one of these doesn't even have a shell,
the interpreter.
What does this mean?
Well,
when something goes wrong on your laptop,
you can get a smart friend,
maybe a system administrator,
they can come poke around, maybe fix it.
The other two, they're on their own.
So we need a system that's reliable,
can respond to events when especially
when things don't go right,
or when unanticipated events happen
and when expected events happen.
So let's talk about these
goals more in depth.
What are our goals?
What are our goals at Apple?
And what are our goals that we hope
that maybe you guys can adopt too?
Well, unlike mainframes and
computers of bygone eras,
we don't want to restart
applications or computers after
you change a configuration detail.
Use...
Users expect us these days.
They expect things to just work,
and can you blame them?
We also want the system
to be more dynamic.
We have hot-- I like the
airport express this way.
It's a hot plug hardware,
and it's a wireless device.
These are low level technology,
like a device as far
as iTunes is concerned,
and it's wireless networking,
which we're all very
familiar with these days.
Finally, it's user friendly.
This is really what we're
trying to go for in a nutshell.
This is a slide that I'd
really like to drive home to.
Today's multi-core CPUs that
Intel and other vendors are
providing are pretty amazing.
We've got quad core, eight core.
Just a couple of years ago,
we were single core.
We need to figure out ways, collectively,
how to extract the power that this modern
hardware provides and take advantage
of it across all layers of the system.
Now, this is one of the web pages on
store.apple.com for one of our machines.
The details aren't important,
except for one little part.
That memory, 512 megabytes,
might seem like a lot, but, you know,
when you have a couple thousand
developers at Apple and tens of
thousands of third-party developers
all trying to share that memory,
we all get a small piece of the pie.
And what we do at Apple,
and we hope you can try to
do too to help everyone out,
is use as little as possible,
and if you do consume a lot
to try and solve a problem,
let it go as quickly as possible,
so that way you can let some
other part of the system or
some other application use it.
So, what we've done with
launchd helps us even more,
and we'll get into that later.
Now, given these goals, of course,
there's going to be obstacles.
What are these obstacles?
Well, straight back to where we started,
life is dynamic.
That is an obstacle.
Back in those past,
when we have those mainframes, well,
we could make assumptions.
We could assume that the
power wasn't going to go out,
that the machine wasn't
going to go to sleep,
network wasn't going to change.
That really made life easy
for us programmers because
we could get away with a lot.
Can't do that as much these days.
And what we do inside of Apple,
and we hope to help work
with you to do the same,
is to push everybody to be more dynamic.
You know, things will change on you,
and you should expect it.
When you do expect things to go
wrong or things to go different,
your software tends to behave better
and your customers are happier.
But some more on the
way of design obstacles.
Back in the old day, again,
kind of making the assumptions, you know,
things happen very linearly.
I was going to do A,
then I was going to do B, and then C.
And that limited concurrency,
because you had to
accomplish things linearly.
And that was unfortunate.
But it was easier to program that way.
So no one's going to blame you.
But these days,
we have a lot of event-driven APIs.
And what we do is we encourage, again,
Apple people and outside of
Apple to adopt these APIs.
And respond to events as they happen.
And now we can do things out of order,
and possibly even in parallel.
But more to the point,
when you adopt these event-driven APIs,
you increase the flexibility
of your software.
And the more flexibility you have,
the more resilient you are to
unanticipated events happening
and not having your software
crumble under the bizarreness of
the system or the environment.
When things go wrong on other systems,
and sometimes our system,
something like this happens.
You get a blue screen of death,
and that's because things fell apart so
bad we had to grind to a halt and reboot.
And what we'd like to do,
and what we encourage, again,
everybody to do,
is adopt ways to avoid this problem.
And most of it's through error recovery.
Now, how did Apple accomplish
our design goals?
Well, launchd is one part of it,
but it's a big part.
Launchd manages processes,
and when processes,
they occasionally fail.
And when they fail,
what launchd does is it restarts them.
In that sense, launchd is a lifeguard.
Watches out, something goes wrong,
it'll save you, get you restarted again.
But also,
given that there's a bunch of processes,
launchd is also a telephone operator,
and it helps these
processes find each other.
This is really all launchd does,
and we'll go into this
in detail quite quickly.
First, let me say that launchd
is very popular at Apple.
There are 164 launchd jobs in
Mac OS X just provided by Apple.
And this is just Mac OS X client.
There are even more on Mac OS X server,
and there are unnamed ones on some
of the other embedded devices.
In fact,
we don't even have startup items anymore.
The fact that launchd
has been so successful.
From airport to x-ray,
many diverse and different technologies
that are from low-level airport to
high-level x-ray with developers,
they're using launchd to
accomplish their design goals.
So I'm glad that for those
of you that are here,
you're going to find out why.
Well, first of all,
fault isolation and recovery.
launchd, at a very simple level,
launches a process, keeps it running.
If it crashes or if
it exits mysteriously,
launchd will restart it.
That's the simplest usage model,
but that's powerful.
In the previous system,
we'd just launch a process
and forget about it and hope
that things went all right.
It's a simple change,
but it makes a world of difference.
Launchd, going with the telephone
operator analogy,
allows for fully asynchronous bootstrap.
We can really help
processes find each other,
even though,
and coordinate things in a much
more parallel way that feeds back
into helping us solve the multi-core
problem which we talked about earlier.
It also provides pay-as-you-go computing.
We try, again,
in the low memory scenarios
and performance goals
that our customers love,
try and help our developers inside
and outside the company only
run software when they need it.
And being event driven helps that too.
And finally, security.
Launchd provides,
and I know this may sound crazy,
just a clean environment for
your process when it starts.
You don't have to worry about pollution
by maybe the user set up some strange
environment variable that may change
the behavior of a library you're using,
or all of a sudden a user may
launch a program in a working
directory that you didn't expect.
Nope, same environment from the
first time to the last time.
It's always clean.
Also,
in a mechanism that Apple primarily uses,
but you can use too,
launchd provides privilege separation,
which going combined with a clean
environment can allow you to accomplish
privilege operations in a secure manner.
So let's go into depth.
Let's go into those
bullets that you all love.
Launchd, first of all, is open source.
We at Apple think this is so important
that we've open sourced this with a
license that is the Apache license.
So that organizations,
such as the BSD projects,
are more likely to include and
find all around more palatable.
We'd like to work with other OS vendors,
such as the BSDs and the Lennoxes,
or anybody else, for that matter,
who wants to adopt it.
We have a URL and a blog and a
mailing list and actually all that
good stuff on launchd.macosforge.org.
In fact, you can see the source live
as we update it here at Apple.
Now, what are we going to cover
today as far as the details?
Well, for you developers in the audience,
we'll cover where your code fits in.
There's a big system.
There's lots of different
places it can go.
How does it get involved?
When is it going to be run?
How do we resolve dependencies?
You know,
we still need to rely on things.
We may be making less assumptions,
but we still need things.
And if we're the backend of something,
how do we check in?
How do we get things going?
If you're a system administrator,
we'll show you some of the
things that you can do,
and we'll give a demo later showing
some of the commands you can do
to interact with the system and
find out how things are working.
And we'll talk about why
launchd is good for you.
So fitting into Mac OS X.
We have some three basic
layers now in Leopard.
This is different than Tiger.
In Tiger,
we just had the per machine layer,
and the per session layer was, well,
less defined.
Now it's much more concrete.
You're going to find
programs like Safari,
iTunes, System UI Server,
running in this collective layer.
And to be completely forthwith,
I may use different words
to describe this layer.
I might say bucket.
I may say session.
I may say context.
I mean all the same thing.
We're still struggling with terminology
for describing these containers.
We also have a per machine layer,
and this layer contains
things like disk arbitrationd,
or kextd, or configd,
if you've ever done a PS.
But what we've added that is truly
new in Leopard is a per user layer.
The per user layer is meant for
programs like these outlined here,
like the GSSD or the C cache agent.
You're not necessarily,
I'm not going to go into
what these exactly do,
but it's a new layer for your
software can run and provide
services on behalf of the user.
So what's the relationship
between these layers?
Well, what we'd like to encourage,
given these programs need
to talk to each other,
they don't exist in a vacuum,
is peer-to-peer or downward
interprocess communication.
We have these three buckets,
as we outlined before,
and we have programs.
Here's some nicknames we give for them.
We have applications, we have agents,
we have daemons.
These are the nicknames
we try and stick to,
but we're not always consistent about.
And what we'd like to encourage is that,
well, talk to the friends
and their direct peers.
And it can go either way.
One app can talk to the other,
or vice versa,
or one agent can talk to the other,
or vice versa.
It's all cool.
But what we'd also like to
encourage is downward communication.
Applications can talk to helper
agents or helper daemons,
or agents can talk to helper daemons.
On the flip side,
why only die with Nord IPC?
What's the problem?
Well, we have this machine-wide layer.
This is where our programs
live that help the machine out.
And oh wait, we can have more than
one user on the system,
and they both could be
running the same program.
In fact, there's a whole bunch
of layers on the system.
A user can have a GUI session,
they can have command line sessions,
or yet future sessions.
When we encourage downward only IPC,
we encourage well-layered designs.
It's unambiguous what the
helper process is at that point.
A GUI session only has a user session,
and it only has one machine
that it's running on.
On the flip side,
the machine has multiple users,
multiple sessions, and at that point,
you'd have to have some policy,
and policy is the right word,
for which user you talk to.
And that gets really messy,
and it's something the computer
shouldn't be trying to do,
you know, at that low of a level.
So what is the purpose
of these containers?
We've been kind of alluding to them.
Let's go in depth.
The per session layer is for programs
that need to interact with the user.
That's the closest we can
come to a session definition.
They come and go with the session.
You want that finder to
exit when you log out.
The per user bucket, or session,
or context, is for programs that don't
need to interact with the user,
but still want to run
on the user's behalf.
They are allowed to
transcend login and logout,
and they're pretty much the lifetime
of the system once they get launched.
And finally,
we have the per machine layer.
We'd really like to encourage the
minimal amount of code that is
required to arbitrate or share
hardware to live at this level.
And we do this because
of the security risks.
Obviously,
it's working on behalf of the machine,
but what it also is doing is
operating on behalf of all the users.
And if you get a security bug,
maybe a buffer overflow,
or some kind of other exploit,
you put all the users at risk.
Whereas if the per user
bucket is a security bug,
then you're operating on
behalf of all the users.
And if the per user program were just
up one more layer at the per user layer,
the damage would be limited to that user.
So if you're not arbitrating the hardware
or helping share it between users,
hopefully you can consider
moving up a layer.
Well, getting started,
let's go down into the meat
more of this presentation.
Let's install a property list,
Apple's favorite data
description language,
in the right location.
There's a whole bunch of standard
locations on Mac OS X where you
can install a property list.
First and foremost,
that probably most of you that may
be shipping software to a customer,
is library launchdamons.
Library launchdamons are
per-machine jobs that are installed
by the system administrator,
and they are loaded up for
the machine for that system.
Now, Apple provides some, obviously,
but we have a directory of our own,
and that's /system/library/launchd.
That's per machine
jobs provided by Apple.
Now let's do four more.
They're called agents.
These can either be the per
user or per session jobs.
We have a separate directory for those.
Firstly, we go look in the home
directory for the user.
Maybe they want a program
only run for them when they're
logged into a machine somewhere.
Well, they can do that by putting a
property list in their home directory
in library and launch agents.
These are loaded in any of
their sessions when they log in,
and the user can limit that
through a key we'll describe later.
Now, the system administrator can
also load jobs into all the
user sessions and on a network.
They can do that through
/network/library/launchagents.
And any machine that mounts that,
launchd will find that and it will
get some jobs loaded up for every
user on every machine on the network.
Sometimes you don't want such a wide net.
You can use /librarylaunchagents to
get processes loaded for each user on
the system as a system administrator.
And finally, the one Apple provides,
/systemlibrarylaunchagents.
Well,
what if you actually wanted to create
one that worked on Tiger and later?
Let's go back to that simple case
where launchd starts a process and
restarts if it crashes or exits.
Well, you're going to need a label.
This label is really critical.
It's a unique identifier for the job.
It's typically a string.
It's reverse DNS because
that's pretty hot these days.
And what it allows us to do,
which is really different
compared to Unix of old,
is we have a name for a process,
regardless of when it starts.
So we have a label.
We have a label that says, "I'm sorry,
this is a new PID.
It's going to be a little bit
more complicated if it crashes
and restarts." The kernel,
on the other hand, has a PID,
which is ephemeral.
Every time it crashes and restarts,
it gets a new PID.
And if you tried to keep chasing it,
you're going to go crazy.
So we have a label, and we can use that,
and we do use that to
keep ourselves sane.
I'm going to read this bullet because
that's the best way to say it.
It's a pre-tokenized array of
strings that corresponds to
the second argument of main,
including argv0,
or the second argument of execv,
and the first argument will
be inferred if not supplied to
launchd via the program key.
I can just say, see the man pages.
It's a little bit more
complicated than it should be,
but what it amounts to is the name of
your program is actually an argument,
and you need to supply that,
and we'll use that name to
figure out what to launch if you
don't tell us what to launch.
And finally, the last key.
It's just three keys.
What to run, a name,
and the on-demand key.
And when you say on-demand false,
we'll keep that program alive,
and we'll keep it alive
for the life of the system.
This is what it looks like in a plist.
It's surrounded by, obviously,
your header for a property
list with the XML tags.
You've got the key labels,
and its value is a string.
In this case, we have com.example.helloD.
And we have the program arguments.
In this case,
the name is a very explicit path
to where it is on the system.
We could have just put helloD,
and launchd would have
found it in user sbin.
But this is more explicit
and a little more cautious.
And finally, onDemandFalse.
OnDemandFalse tells launchd, start it,
keep it alive forever.
All right.
So this schema,
I've mentioned three keys.
There's actually a lot, lot more.
And the man page is the best place
to go if you want to see them.
But to give some brief examples,
the working directory.
You're probably used
to that in your shell.
You can say CD here, CD there.
Launchd lets you set
that in a property list.
Now every time launchd starts that job,
it'll be started with
that working directory.
Environment variables.
If you are at all familiar with some of
our malloc debugging library facilities,
you will know that the malloc
behavior can be changed via
malloc environment variables.
Maybe you want to do that for your job.
Maybe you're having difficulty with it.
Well,
you can add it to the property list,
and now you know every time
that program is started,
be it the first boot or
some crash and restart,
the environment variables
will be the same.
You can set the program.
This goes back to that program
arguments key and its relationship.
This allows you to skip the path walk
of maybe bin or user S bin or whatever
and directly execute a program.
Username, this only applies to daemons
since they run as root by default.
Maybe you don't want a particular
program that's a daemon to run as root.
You can pick a user to run it as.
A really basic example is the start
interval and start calendar interval.
Start interval, it's pure.
If you say 137, we're going to start that
program every 137 seconds.
It's a little bit different
than cron that way,
because cron, well,
doesn't let you do that
level of granularity.
The best you could hope for is
once a minute on the minute.
But should you prefer
a calendar interval,
maybe every Thursday at 3:00 PM,
you can use start calendar interval.
And to talk about some improvements of
start calendar interval for Leopard,
we now support more of them.
So if you wanted to support
multiple calendar intervals,
you can do that.
And secondarily,
we fixed a popular bug to report
that if a calendar interval is
missed while the machine is asleep,
we will now quickly notice that,
or hopefully quickly notice that
when the machine wakes up and
run jobs that should have been
run while the machine was asleep.
Finally, an example-- yeah.
Sorry about that.
Finally, an example,
now that we have the whole concept
of per user and per session for
context or sessions or buckets,
we have limit load to session type.
Popular examples are background, Aqua,
login window.
We have a couple more,
but these are the ones
to mention up front.
Background is the per user context,
and Aqua is the graphical login context.
And login window is what you see
when you boot up to a login prompt.
And the reason for this is sometimes
not every program you want run in,
let's say, the Finder while you're
logged into the GUI.
You want run while you're
at the login window.
But some you do want run in both,
like the bezel UI.
Whenever you adjust the
volume or the brightness,
that happens to launch a program
on demand in the background.
And we want that program loaded into
both the Aqua and login window context.
Now dependencies,
a favorite topic for people,
and I can't blame them,
because we all have needs
that we need to sort out.
We looked at things a little
bit differently in Apple.
We decided that programs,
programmers work with contracts.
We need to ask what those pro, uh,
contracts were.
Well, they define expectations
and promises on both sides.
In fact, there are two kinds.
We have programmatic,
which is every API you've ever used,
and you kind of not,
you don't think about it.
But one that we sometimes
forget is data driven.
And what we've talked about thus far
with all the property lists is the fact
that we're using a data driven API.
And it's a very nice API,
and it's an API that hopefully
you all can appreciate.
But I do know the system
administrators appreciate it,
because now they can write tools
to introspect all the programs that
run and ask questions about them,
or maybe change their
behavior in a consistent way.
And it makes it just much easier to
interrogate and change the system.
And it provides for consistent behavior.
I can't say any programmer who would
rather see the same recipe of code
copied and pasted between applications,
when they could defer to some other
program to implement it for them.
Well, let's say you're writing a program.
How are you going to
solve your dependencies?
Well, we're going to start a trend here.
For network changes, we, Apple,
recommend internally and both
externally that programmers use
the system configuration framework
to monitor for network events.
Remember those laptops.
They're coming and going from networks.
If you want to write an application
that your customers will appreciate,
that's the way to go.
Now, you might say, "Hey,
I'm writing a server product.
That server's not moving,
and its network's not changing."
And what we would like to suggest is,
"Well, okay, fine.
It may not move,
but if you're not responding
to network events,
it makes it very difficult for
system administrators to reconfigure
their network in a way that's
transparent to their users." And as
we watch more and more server
administrators maintain lots of servers,
they want to be able to
centrally administer them.
Well, we're going to start a trend here.
For network changes, we, Apple,
recommend internally and both
externally that programmers use
the system configuration framework
to monitor for network events.
Remember those laptops.
They're coming and going from networks.
If you're not responding
to network events,
they might not be able to
centrally administer them.
And as we watch more and more server
administrators maintain lots of servers,
they're using things like DHCP to
assign IP addresses to them.
And it's not surprising these
days to see system administrators
reconfigure the network and like to
see those updates happen on the fly.
If you're writing a server,
we'd really appreciate it if you, too,
would consider using the
system configuration framework.
Let's say you've got disk changes.
Well, the disk arbitration
framework is the way to go.
And this, again, both client and server,
this permeates everything.
We have FireWire and USB.
We have Fiber Channel.
It allows for hot plug devices.
If you happen to be in
the previous session,
we demonstrated basic
Unix tools like I/O stab,
discovering when devices come and go.
It's very important that everyone
pay attention when disks come and
go to provide a user experience.
And a server administrator can do that.
It's a server administrator
experience that makes everyone happy.
Finally, for device discovery,
we recommend the I/O Kit framework.
We're really dynamic these days
between USB and FireWire and
CardBus was the old technology.
And I believe ExpressCard is the
new plug-in slot for laptops.
Their devices come in going like crazy.
And if you use the I/O Kit framework,
you can find out about that.
Other changes are going to
require other frameworks.
Well, why are we driving home
the framework message?
In the old days, with System Starter and
other similar mechanisms,
programmers, and this is just the way we
all collectively did things,
declared which processes they needed.
But what we noticed in Mac OS X is
the processes were actually an
implementation detail of a framework.
And they were already linking
against the framework,
so that was the dependency declaration.
It was automatic.
And what we did is we provided
a mechanism for the frameworks
to find the processes they need.
And should that process go away in
the future or a new one comes along,
Dave Zarzycki and that new
one be added to a framework
that didn't have one before,
it won't affect the application
writers because they're already
declaring their dependencies by
what frameworks they link against.
So this is a list of
some common examples.
Some of you may have seen them.
Just link against the frameworks.
You'll be a lot happier.
Well,
let's say you're writing a framework.
What do you got to do?
Well, I'm going to pick a case example.
It goes all the way back to the '70s.
Simple input, simple output,
takes a login, returns a structure.
This is getpwnam.
It looks up an account.
It previously read a file directly,
because that was just the
way we did things back then.
But later in the Mac OS X evolution,
we changed it to talk to a
program called Directory Services.
But how did we avoid a race condition?
Because once that API is called,
we need that process to be running,
don't we?
Well, maybe not.
And the way we did that is by
telling LaunchD about directory
services and the fact that it
vends inter-process communication.
This is the change we
made to the property list.
And this goes all the way back
to what I said LaunchD does.
It watches out for
processes and restarts them,
but it's also a telephone operator.
And what this allows us to do-- and if
I may stretch the telephone operator
analogy-- this is like getting an
entry in a phone book that you can
then look up and start dialing.
But the person doesn't-- or the
process-- doesn't need to be
home yet and ready to answer.
But you're not going to get
a no such number problem
when you make the phone call.
And what this allows us to do is actually
launch directory services on demand,
because we know that a process
is trying to talk to it.
And we can keep that process-- again,
stretching the analogy-- ringing
until directory services,
the process,
comes online and picks up the
phone and starts answering.
This is very powerful.
This is exactly what allows
us to have a very asynchronous
boot up and to be able to launch
things in a pay-as-you-go manner.
So the property list.
What are we promising you guys?
Again, API contracts.
We need to make promises to you.
Well, if you use IPC,
you're writing a framework,
you're writing the
backend to a framework,
we're going to have
race-free IPC handle setup.
And how do we do that?
Well, we read all of the property
lists before we run any program.
We're populating that directory
of possible IPC channels.
This is true for per session.
( Transcript missing )
Wait a sec.
What are we not promising you?
What's the other end of the equation?
Well, no network interfaces have
been found or configured.
No auxiliary file systems
have been mounted.
Not all hardware has been discovered yet.
In fact, we're basically promising
that any detail about the
configuration beyond IPC is done.
But if you're using the
frameworks as an application,
you'll be OK.
And this applies to everyone.
We would really appreciate it,
both inside of Apple and
outside of Apple,
if you just collectively,
if we could all make fewer assumptions
about the state of the system and
use the callbacks from the framework.
All right.
Let's say you're writing
a backend to a framework.
What do you got to do?
You're going to
We have some simple APIs.
They're boxed objects in an
object-oriented terminology.
But they're really, really simple.
And their whole purpose is inter-process
communication with launchd.
Here's a simple example.
We have a boxing of a string,
in this case, hello world.
It returns temp.
And we can unbox it
with the basic getter.
Well,
we've been talking about IPC for a while.
How does that all work?
Well, you've got to get the IPC handles
from launchd before you can
start talking to your customers.
How do we do that?
Well, today,
you create a new string with a
known constant called checkin,
and you send that via one API.
It allows you to send an object graph
to launchd and get an object graph back.
If it returns null,
there was some kind of problem
in the IPC at a very low level,
it's an error.
There is also secondary failures
that need to be checked.
You might be able to talk to launchd,
but the request that was made
was somehow interpreted and
possibly rejected by launchd.
And the way we do this is
by checking the type of the
response via the get type API.
If it's error no,
we can extract the error
no and then print out why
launchd rejected the request.
Otherwise,
things are probably moving along.
What do we need to do next
if we're writing a backend?
Well, we need to iterate the results.
: This is an advisory idle timeout
to help consume less resources.
You obviously don't have
to pay attention to it.
And if you're writing
a program that's busy,
you don't obviously have to exit.
You're busy.
But we'd like to see everybody
inside and outside idle exit.
And this is a hint about when to do it.
You can also iterate the Mach services
that were provided to your job
and define in the property list.
You can iterate the sockets.
And you can do this by first
extracting the well-known keys
using a dictionary lookup.
And then you can iterate the
results of that dictionary
fetch via the dict iterate call.
And the next slide will demonstrate
what that callback looks like.
It's real simple.
Key, value, a cookie,
or a reference constant,
whatever you would like to call it.
that'll help you iterate the results.
Now if you're a system administrator
or just a programmer trying
to figure out what's going on,
you can use the launchd tl command
to talk to launchd from the shell.
It has many available subcommands.
There are a few listed here.
We have list.
It'll list all the programs
loaded into launchd.
And in fact, it can pass the label,
again, the unique identifier,
as an argument to list,
and that'll tell you more information
about the job loaded into launchd.
You can also load and
unload a property list.
And those commands also allow
you to tweak whether or not it's
disabled on a permanent basis.
And should you need to debug
what's going on in the system,
you can say log space level space debug.
And that'll crank up
the output of launchd.
You will need to, of course,
adjust your syslog configuration
to actually have those
messages go somewhere,
but that's covered in another talk.
You can also manually kickstart a job.
You can stop a job.
And all that does is send a SIGTERM.
But again,
going back to the label analogy,
launchd keeps track of the current PID,
and it will send it to
the correct process.
So you don't need to worry about
any race between your typing of PS,
and if it dies and restarts
and gets a new PID.
Finally, we have export and help.
Export extracts all the environment
variables out of launchd that
can be useful for debugging.
And help will list more
subcommands and how to use them.
So what's new in Leopard?
Well, we've added Mach IPC support.
This may not affect most of you,
but it affects a lot of
what Apple's implemented.
If should you choose to use it,
it's real simple.
You can add the dictionary
as we iterated before.
We've also added agents.
That's both the per user and per session.
If you look on Leopard right now,
just in the system library launch agents,
you'll see several dozen adoptions
of that technology to provide
many services on Mac OS X.
We've also-- and this is, I think,
kind of fun--
At a conditional keepalive support,
and this is logically ORed.
So what does that mean?
Instead of saying keepalive true,
like keep this program
running all the time,
you can make it conditional.
The first example, successful exit.
Let's say you want to run a program,
and as long as it fails,
you want launchd to restart it.
But the minute,
or the first time it actually succeeds,
you want launchd to give
up and just walk away.
Well, you can do that now.
You can say successful exit, false.
That's what launchd does.
You could actually do the inverse, too.
Maybe you want the program
running as long as it exits zero,
which is traditionally
considered success.
Well, just set it to true.
Now, doing the logical OR,
the network state can
be paid attention to.
Network state's ambiguous.
It just means that we plausibly might
be able to talk to another machine.
No guarantees.
But if you feel that your software is
not very useful unless that is true,
you can express that now
in your property list.
And then when the machine boots up, or
Whatever the case may be,
launchd won't start the process
until we sniff out a network.
Again, oring in the next possible state,
we have pass state.
There's already several projects at
Apple that have adopted this to only
run their programs when they're needed.
And a popular example
is a configuration file.
So what we can do is say, well,
this program isn't needed unless
the user's actually configured it.
Well, a great way to express that is say,
keep this program alive as long
as the configuration file exists.
And this is how we express it.
You say pass state, it's a dictionary,
and then you can have as many
paths as you want to monitor.
Again, they're all logically ORed.
You can do the existence of a path,
you can do the non-existence of a path,
whatever makes more sense
for your application.
Once again, all these top level keys,
successful exit, network state,
and pass state are logically ORed.
So keep that in mind.
So just to rehash our goals,
we would like to see everybody
recover for more hours and
monitor for more events and
Pay attention to when
things happen around you,
be it the devices you need,
or the networks you need, or disks.
We have the mechanisms.
You should use it.
We have our frameworks.
We can write our own.
You can use launchd to launch on demand,
help save resources
for everybody involved.
And should you be writing a framework,
please use launchd to help your backend
and your framework coordinate and
find each other in a race-free way.
And again,
to buy off on the pay-as-you-go model.
So I want to give some demonstrations.
If we could switch to
the demo machine one,
I'd like to show two changes
to basic Unix technologies that
we've made launch on demand.
So SSH has its own public/private key
cryptography to simplify authentication.
And I'm going to create a key right now.
So we have a key.
And it has a program to help
cache that key so we don't
constantly have to re-authenticate.
That's the SSH agent.
And normally what a user would have to
do is say something like eval ssh agent,
and it would say this,
and this is how you would start it.
Well, that's annoying.
Why should I always have to start it?
Why can't the computer do this for me?
And well, we can do that.
What we did in Mac OS X is we
made SSH agent launch on demand.
So if we actually look,
the agent isn't running.
But if we look in launchd with list,
and I'm going to grep
here to sort it out.
We have the SSH launching on demand.
And this first column is the PID,
and it's not running.
But just by-- if we say echo ssh ossock,
we see that it's actually
ready to be talked to.
So we can type ssh add to
add that key we just created.
And now, when we do launchctl list,
we see that it's PID 160,
which if we had looked
at the PID of SSHAd,
that was probably 159.
And now we can kill 160 and say, oops,
it died.
Launchd has noticed.
This was actually the signal,
the exit code.
So it exited with two.
But we can add it again.
There it goes.
But one other thing to say
about this is this SSH agent,
the way it's configured,
can be accessed by all GUI apps.
So what that means is things like Xcode,
when it runs SVN and SVN tries to
use SSH to talk to your server,
that SSH can talk to your agent.
Because the SSH agent was configured
with all the other launchd jobs,
and that means that every launchd
job can find that SSH agent,
which was really complicated and
really hard to set up right in previous
versions of the operating system.
So another example of launch on
demand that we've done in Leopard
is we've made X11 launch on demand.
What that means is you don't need to,
as the user,
either double click X11.app or
somehow ensure that it's running.
You can just say, Xterm.
And if you watch the doc,
There it goes.
It's launched.
And again, it's done via the same way.
We've modified it just a
little bit and told launchd
about it with a property list.
And now any program that uses the X11
library or framework will automatically
get the server run if they need it.
To give more examples of
what can be done-- well,
now we killed the server
and Xterm got cranky.
To give more examples of launchd
and what can be done either as a
system administrator or a developer,
let's say list.
This is listing all the
agents on the system.
Any,
so a lot of examples are all right here.
We have things like Spotlight.
That's this menu right here.
Or,
What's another good example?
The pasteboard for when
you do copy and paste.
But notice how many
programs aren't running.
This is what Apple is using to help
save resources for all your users.
This is that quick look process
that you saw demoed in the keynote.
If I were to start browsing via the
finder and go to quick look mode,
it's do launchd to list again.
Well,
I need to get it to render something.
That was probably a generic icon.
But this quick look--
Oh, space.
Oh, it's an alias.
It's on-- it should have--
had I found a document,
actually--
Oh, well.
You would have seen Quick Look running.
And to give you a better example
of how this can be used to debug,
Let's see what com.apple.quicklook
is configured to run as.
Well,
we can see their program is right here.
We can see that they've
been this Mach service,
and that's what would have
launched it on demand,
had I found a document to render.
And it has some advisory
exit time out of zero.
It's on demand is true,
and it only wants to
load in GUI sessions,
because that's only where it makes sense.
Well, you can use other examples too,
like, well, what are all the environment
variables in launchd?
Here they are.
Here's that SSH OSOC that
makes that possible.
This is what makes the launch
and demand X11 possible.
And here's some other basic environment
variables that users expect.
You can also-- let's give an
example of unloading something.
So you can say, unload system library
launchagents com.apple.spotlight.
So what this is going to
do is unload spotlight from
the current running session.
And what you're going to notice
right up here in the menu
is this is going to go away,
because that's what's drawing that.
But we can load it back.
And I'm going to do something
here to make sure it works right.
So we're only interested in Aqua jobs.
And this is the job we're trying to load.
Now it's back.
So let's say if you're
developing that program,
you could then maybe unload it,
modify the plist,
add an environment variable,
and then load it back to get maybe malloc
debugging or some other feature enabled.
Now what else can we do?
Let's see.
We can start a job.
That's real simple.
That just kicks it off.
I showed export.
Oh, debugging.
So let's say you need to debug launchd.
What you can do, I'm going to demonstrate
syslog a little bit here.
I forgot that we can't do that part.
Well, what you would do is you can
say launchctl log level debug,
and that engages it.
You can verify by typing log,
and that shows you what's being logged.
You can obviously go
back to log level notice,
which is the default.
But what you can do is crank it up to
debug and then tail the system log.
And that's pretty verbose when enabled.
You'll need to adjust your syslog.conf,
but it'll tell you everything you need.
If you want a more granular level,
you can add debug true in your property
list and just get debug output from
launchd when your launchd is working
on behalf of your particular job.
I think that's it for
what I want to demo.
So if we go back to the slides, we can
Go into more information.
We have documentation and sample code.
You can also go to the open
source website and get involved
and ask questions there.